                      	   Scream Tracker


                      <<<<< USERS MANUAL >>>>>


                      (C) 1990 Sami Tammilehto
		    
		    
==============================================================================


        Contents by reference number:
	
1       The Scream Tracker enviroment
1.1     The directory structure
1.2     Using the program
1.3     The piano keyboard
1.4     The display
1.5     Machine requirements
1.6     Global commands
1.7	Color setup
2       Instruments
2.1     What are they?
2.2     Instrument disks
2.2.1   What are they?
2.2.2   Creating instrument disks
2.2.3   The instrument disk 99
2.3     Different parameters describing the instrument
3       Setup
3.1     Playing mode and speeds
3.2     EditSound, Enable Timer and Instrument Disk Drive
3.3     Directories
4       Instrument Library
4.1     What is it?
4.2     Moving around in the instrument library
4.3     The fields in the upper section.
4.4     Commands specific to the Edit Library mode.
4.5     Creating the instrument library
4.5.1   Creating a library manually
4.5.2   Easier creation way
4.5.3   Adding separate samples easily
5       Orders
5.1     What are they?
5.2     Editing orders
5.3     Commands specific to Edit Orders
6       Patterns
6.1     What are they?
6.2     Editing patterns
6.3	Commands specific to Edit Patterns
6.4     Special commands
6.4.1   What are they?
6.4.2   List of special commands
7       Sample list
7.1     What is it?
7.2     Test fields and beat testing.
7.3     List of commands
8       Loading, saving and playing songs
8.1     Loading a song/module
8.2     Saving song/module
8.3     Playing songs
8.4     Infopage and status line info
8.5     Scope
8.6	Tracking and Recording
8.7     Loading amiga modules


==============================================================================


1       The Scream Tracker enviroment

1.1     The directory structure

        The Scream Tracker is situated in it's own directory,
        normally C:\ST. Under this parent directory you can
        find files and directories used by Scream Tracker.
        The SONG diretory contains the songs and modules
        for the Scream Tracker. The STINS99 directory
        acts as an instrument disk, which contains
        the instruments stored on hard disk. The INS directory
        is used for caching the instrument disks and
        the ADD directory is used for adding new samples.

1.2     Using the program

        When you load the Scream Tracker (by executing ST.EXE)
        you'll see the startup-screen. From this screen you
        can go to the main menus by pressing left arrow key.
        You can toggle menus fast with their hotkeys (the
        capital letters) or move between them with cursor keys.
        By pressing enter you can select the menu choice highlighted.
        The three rightmost menus contain commands specific to
        Edit Patterns, Edit Samples and Edit Library functions,
        and the hotkeys shown in them apply only in each of
        these edit modes, respectively. The other hotkeys can be
        executed anytime (except in Dos Shell of course).

1.3     The piano keyboard

        The computers keyboard is divided into 2+ octaves and used
        to emulate the common piano style keyboard. The octaves are
        the following:
	
                    2 3   5 6 7   9 0
        octave 2+: q w e r t y u i o p
                    s d   g h j
        octave 1:  z x c v b n m
	
        The keyboard is used when testing instruments or entering notes
        to a pattern. Remark that the letters are small, not capital ones.
	There's also a special beat entering keyboard:
	
	Q W E R T Y U I O P	- Uppercase (with SHIFT)
	1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10	- These letters will play the sample shown
				  here in C1. It's easy to make drum beats
				  by putting the drums in the beginning of
				  the sample list (<11 in number) and set
				  their C2SPD:s so that C1 sounds good.
				  Then you can enter the drums with
				  the beat keyboard. The beat keyboard only
				  functions in pattern editing. (you can
				  use beat testing in Edit Samples)

1.4     The display

        The display is divided into four parts, of which the first one
        tells the Scream Tracker version number and username (if ST is
        registered).
          The second part of the display is reserved for some often used
        values, which define the lower pinao keyboard octave, default
        sample, default volume, songs start tempo, songs name, current
        pattern, Current channel, Global volume for the song, and finally
        channel on/off status.
          The third part, whose background is brown, is the editing area,
        where all editing of the song is performed. It has several edit
        screens, of which more is told later.
          The last part is the bottomline, which acts as a statusline,
        and displays things like loading, saving, and, while the music
        is being played, the current position in song.

1.5     Machine requirements

	The Scream Tracker requires a fast machine. In this caes this
	means at least an 8Mhz AT. 12Mhz at is suggested, for with
	slower machines the PC-Speaker will function poorly. Although
	Covox & SoundBlaster will work with 8Mhz machines with good
	guality. The machine should NOT be slowed down by 386 specific
	memory enhancement utilities using the VM86 mode. These include
	QEMM, 386^MAX and Windows 3. If the sound seems to be too low
	and it's pitch varies rapidly, the machine has not enough power.		
	The VM86 products should be removed while using ST. Scream Tracker
	also requires at least CGA to use scope. All other functions use 
	text screens.


1.6     Global commands

        CTRL-D..This command shells to DOS. Remeber that if you leave the
                music playing when shelling to dos, it might interfere with
                programs run there
        CTRL-W..Save (write) song
        CTRL-L..Load song
        CTLR-R..Load (retrieve) module
        CTRL-A..Load amiga module
        ALT-F1..Toggle channel 1 on/off
        ALT-F2..Toggle channel 2 on/off
        ALT-F3..Toggle channel 3 on/off
        ALT-F4..Toggle channel 4 on/off
        SH-F5...Play song. This (as all play commands)
                also views the infopage
        SH-F6...Play from current order. The current
                order is the one the cursor is on in the
                Edit order mode.
        F6......Play current patter. The pattern will
                be looped.
        CTRL-Z..Play with scope. The scope requires CGA
                or compatible display and also faster
                machine than normal playing.
	CTRL-T..Track song
	CTRL-X..Record song
        F5......Show infopage
        F8......Stop playing
        F7......Load instruments from disk. This function
                is needed if the samples contained in
                the Edit Samples list are modified. It's
                not needed if only parameters are changed,
                only when samples are removed or inserted.
        F1......Edit Order
        F2......Edit Patterns
        F3......Edit Samples
        F4......Edit Library
        {.......Decrease global volume by 3
        }.......Increase global volume by 3
	
1.7	Color setup

	You can find the color setup in the 'Other' menu. When it's selected,
	a window with colornames pops up and on the right side a hexadecimal
	value for each color is shown. You can edit this value for quick
	changes or press SPACE to select the color the cursor is on from
	a palette. If you want your changes to take effect, exit color
	setup with ENTER, otherwise press ESC.


2       Instruments

2.1     What are they?

        The instruments are samples, which might be considered to
        be sort of a record of a real instrument. To play the instrument
        at different notes, it's speed is altered. Also a few other
        values can be changed for an instrument. These include possible
        looping and volume. Also vibrato and other special effects
        can be used. The instruments are often quite long, about 10K
        average, so it's best to store most of them on disks. Remark
        that within this document and the program, the words sample
        and instrument are both used interchangeably.

2.2     Instrument disks

2.2.1   What are they?

        The Scream Tracker supports 99 instrument disks, of which
        number 99 is the harddisk (and 00 undefined). The instrument disks
        are used to store the samples (and ONLY the actual data, not
        the parameters). In both the library and edit samples screen
        you can specify the disk where a particular instrument can
        be found. When loading an instrument, the ST first looks
        for it in the cache directory, and if it's not found there,
        ST will prompt for the correct disk (if it's defined). After
        you have insterted the correct disk and pressed a key, the ST
        will also transfer the sample to the cache directory, for faster
        access.

2.2.2   Creating instrument disks

        Creating an instrument disk is a straightforward procedure.
        You simple format a disk and make a following directory into
        it's root: STINSxx where xx should be replaced with the instrument
        disk number you are creating. (The samples stored to the disk will
        then lie in the directory) Do not make several disks with the
        same number, and remember that disks 00 and 99 should not be
        made, for the numbers are used for different purposes in ST.

2.2.3   The instrument disk 99

        Instrument disk 99 differs from other instrument disk because
        it's situated in the harddisk. It works just as a normal
        disk, but it's instruments are NOT cached. It's automatically
        created when ST is installed.

2.3     Different parameters describing the instrument

        Instrument parameters are shown in fields inside the ST. The fields
        are named: File, C2SPD, Ds, Vl, LpBeg, LpEnd.
        The first field descripbes the filename for the sample. The next
        one is the speed (in Hz) at which the sample should be played so
        that it would sound like C2 (mid C). The next field specifies the
        instrument disk in which the sample can be found. The next value
        is the default volume, the volume used when not otherwise specified.
        The last two next fields describe the possible looping of the sample.
        When the first value is 0 and the last 65535, no looping should be
        performed. When the values differ from those, the last value defines
        the byte at which the sample should be halted, and restarted at
        byte defined by the first value. Inside ST these fields are often
        followed by Test fields, which can be used for testing the instrument
        with the piano keyboard.


3       Setup

3.1     Playing mode and speeds

        You have currently four choises of hardware to play songs.
        The one everyone has, is the PC-Speaker. The other options
        include SoundBlaster, a PC sound card from Creative Lab's inc.
        and Covox in LPT1/2. The term Covox means a device simply
        acting as DA converter in printer port datalines.
          The other important selection is machine speed. It theoretically
        specifies how fast your machine is, so that the program can know
        how good guality sound it can output. Generally 12Mhz is sufficient,
        so in practice even if you have 33Mhz machine, it's better to keep
        speed in 12Mhz, for there is practically no quality difference with
        it and higher speeds. In addition when running sound at lower speed,
        the machine will work faster while editing songs the same time they
        are being played.
	  The current version of ST also supports very slow speeds, down to
	5Mhz, which may enable ordinary PC's to play songs. Although the 
	quality is quite low, and these low speeds are only availible for
	Covox and SoundBlaster.
	  Note that you can select different speed for both the Scope and
	normal Playing. It is strongly suggested that you use lower speed
	for scope, for it needs more power.

3.2     EditSound, Enable Timer and Instrument Disk Drive

        If timer is not enabled, dos timer interrupt 8 will be masked off while
        playing. It generally produces better sounds, especially with PC-
        Speaker, but makes little difference with Covox or SoundBlaster.
        The main advantage from keeping the Timer on is the fact DOS clock
        will run in DOS shell (the machine keeps the time right when playing)
        and disk drive motors will be stopped in time. (When timer is off,
        the floppy disk drive motors run on forever after started)
          The EditSound option tells the program whether or not play a note 
	when it's written to a pattern. It's generally easier to make music 
	when the option is on, but playing notes slow the machine down a bit.
	  The Instrument Disk Drive specifies the drive into which you'll
	insert the instrument disks when requested.

3.3     Directories

	You can specify five directories:
	System directory contains the exe, help and libray files.
	Instrument directory is used for instrument caching from disks.
	Song directory is used to store songs and modules
	Instrument disk 99 directory specifies the path for idisk 99,
	  which should lie on the harddisk.
	Add directory is the directory used for quick adding of samples
	  to the library.

4       Instrument Library

4.1     What is it?

        The instrument library is used to store the parameters of
        instruments. It contains 99 usable sublibraries with 100
        instruments each. In practice it means you can define 9900
        instruments into the library. The library also provides
        an easy way to select instruments when making a song. You
        can write descriptions for each instrument, and then choose
        the instruments for the song by descriptions. You can also
        test instruments within the library, but it's often not
        practical, for most instruments are probably on disks, so you'll
        have to dig the correct instrument disks for testing...
        The instrument library also contains a sublibrary called
        clipboard (#99). Don't mix this clipboard with the one used
        for copying stuff in the edit patterns mode. The clipboard
        can be used for transferring and adding instruments to the
        library. Remark that the clipboard is NOT saved to disk, so
        it's emptied when you exit the program.

4.2     Moving around in the instrument library

        To get to the instrument library one must either press F4 or
        select it from the edit menu. In the menu, the bright block
        is your cursor, which can be moved with the cursor keys.
        The screen is also divided into two parts. The lower displaying
        the sublibraries, and the upper one contents of the current
        sublibrary (one with grey background on the lower side). You
        can toggle the sides with TAB key. In the lower side you can
        edit the names of the sublibraries, and in the upper one, the
        instruments contained in the instrument library.

4.3     The fields in the upper section.

        The upper section is divided into multiple fields, containing
        the information about a sample. The first field from the left
        is the description field. It (as all text fields in ST) can
        be edited with only BackSpace. The other fields are same
        as in edit samples. (see 2.3)

4.4     Commands specific to the Edit Library mode.

        TAB.....Used for toggling the upper/lower side. The current side
                is displayed with triangles in the middle left side screen.
        <,>.....Select previous/next sublibrary.
        DEL.....Delete current instrument from the library
        INS.....Make room for a new instrument
        ALT-M...Move instrument to different disk. The disk will be prompted
                after selecting this command. The sample will be deleted form
                the old disk.
        ALT-C...Copy current sub-library to clipboard.
        ALT-F...Fill clipboards disk values with the disk value in the first
                instrument in the clipboard (the one on row 0)
        ALT-P...Begin place function. Place can only be started in the
                clipboard. When ALT-P is pressed, the instrument under cursor
                appears to the middle of the screen. Then the cursor can be
                moved to a library this instrument should be situated. When
                pressing enter the instrument will be inserted to cursor.
                After the instrument is placed, a next instrument in the
                clipboard will appear to the middle of the screen and can
                be placed. ALT-P also terminates the place function. When
                place is in effect, all TEST fields will play the sample
                which is to be placed.
        ALT-S...Will skip the instrument currently being placed and selects
                the next instrument for placing.
	SPACE...When pressed on the filename field, pops up a filepad which
		displays instruments in cache, and from where you can quickly 
		select an instrument on the harddisk.

4.5     Creating the instrument library

4.5.1   Creating a library manually

        To simple but hard way to create the library is to copy
        instruments as you gather them to instrument disks, and
        then add them to the library by writing their name, description
        and other parameters.

4.5.2   Easier creation way

        If you have many modules already, you can exstract the instruments
        and their parameters from the modules. This can be accomplished
        by loading a module at a time, and then executing ALT-T from
        the edit samples mode to copy the instrument information to
        the clipboard. The ALT-T also saves all the samples in the module
        to instrument disk 99 (hard disk). After ALT-T has been pressed,
        one must go to the clipboard in edit library mode, and move,
        if he want's to, the instruments to other instrument disk, and
        thus freeing space on the harddisk. This can be accomplished with
        ALT-M. Then the instruments must be moved to their correct
        directories with the ALT-P (place) function.

4.5.3   Adding separate samples easily

        To add a group of samples easily, copy them to the ADD directory.
        Then execute ALT-A, which will transfer them to instrument disk 99
        and copy their names to the clipboard, from where you'll only have
        to place (move) them.


5       Orders

5.1     What are they?

        The orders are used to define the order in which the patterns are
        played.

5.2     Editing orders

        The get to the diting mode, you must either press F1, or select
        Orders from Edit menu. The edit orders display is divided into
        two coluns, the left one specifying the order number, and the
        right one specifying which pattern to play at that order.

5.3     Commands specific to Edit Orders

        DEL.....Deletes the order the cursor is on
        INS.....Makes room for order to the cursor
        ALT-C...Clears the song/samples. When ALT-C is selected, the
                program will ask whether samples should be preserved,
                so you can save the instruments, but clear only the
                patterns in addition to clearing the entire song.


6       Patterns

6.1     What are they?

        The patterns describe the actual notes to be played. The music
        is divided into patterns mainly to make it easier to repeat
        some parts of it. This can be accomplished by simply playing
        patterns many times.

6.2     Editing patterns

        The edit patterns mode can be netered with either F2 or with
        menus. The screen is divided into 5 main columns, of which
        the first one specifies the row, and tha last four ones each
        represent channels (leftmost is number 1, rightmost number 4).
        Each channel consists of 6 subfields:
        C#1 02 ùù H08
        ³ ³ ³  ³  ³ÀInfo byte
        ³ ³ ³  ³  ÀSpecial command
        ³ ³ ³  ÀVolume (ùù = default)
        ³ ³ ÀInstrument (ùù = last one)
        ³ ÀOctave (0-4)
        ÀNote
        The note field, as it's name suggests, specifies the note to be
        played, and the octave field at which octave the note is to be
        played. The instrument field specifies the instrument used
        for this sample. It has no effect is note is not specified.
        It can also be omitted. If so, the last instrument for that
        channel is used. The next field specifies the volume for
        an instrument. It can be changed while a note is being
        played to create volume slide effects. If it's omitted, the
        default volume for the current instrument is used. The last two
        fields specify a possible special command.
	  There are also defaults for some values. They are shown on the
	screens upper section. Defaults include octave (for the keyboards
	bottom row), volume and sample. Defaults can be changed with
	approriate keys or by writing a new value to volume/sample/octave
	field. Last value written to any of the previously mentioned fields
	will make it a default one for future operations.

6.3     Commands specific to Edit Orders

	+,-....Change pattern
	/,*....Change default octave
	<,>....Change default sample
	INS....Insert row. This command inserts an empty row to the cursor.
	       Notes beginning from the one the cursor is on are moved one
	       row downwards and the last note in the pattern is deleted.
	DEL....Delete row. This command deletes the row the cursor is on
	       and moves all the rows below one row upwards. It empties
	       also the new last note in the pattern.
	.(dot).Deletes the note currently on writing empty on top of it
	ALT-B..Mark area begin. The area is displayed with blue background.
	ALT-E..Mark area end.
	ALT-T..Mark entire pattern to pattern. Handy for copying entire
	       patterns!
	ALT-L..Mark entire channel to area.
	ALT-U..Unmark area. This removes the blue background.
	ALT-C..Copy marked area to clipboard. This command copies the
	       area with the blue background for later copying.
	ALT-P..Insert clipboard to cursor. Inserts the clipboard to
	       the current cursor position moving notes under it 
	       downwards in the pattern.
	ALT-O..Overwrite clipboard to cursor. This command copies
	       the clipboard to cursor and deletes any notes it is
	       placed upon.
	ALT-S..Set sample in area. Sets every sample number on the
	       area selected to current sample.
	ALT-V..Set volume in area. Sets the default volume to entire
	       area.
	ALT-A..Substract halfnote from area. This command decreases
	       every notes value by a halfnote on the selected area.
	       For example C#2 becomes C-2 and C-3 becomes B-2.
	ALT-Q..Add halfnote to area. Same as substract, but adds 
	       instead of substracting.
	ALT-M..Toggle polymode for channel. With this command you can
	       include/exclude channels from polymode note-entering.
	       in polymode entering, the cursor is moved to the next
	       channel having the polymode set whenever a note is entered.
	       Thus in polymode notes pressed will be divided between
	       selected channels. This allows notes to play longer;
	       a new note can start while the old one is being played.
	       Of course this takes more channels. Polymode is disabled
	       if no channels are selected. The selected status is shown
	       on the bottomrow.
	ALT-Z..Erase marked area. This command clears the area selected
	       to empty note values. Use it with care!

6.4     Special commands

6.4.1   What are they?

        The special commands can be used to change the way a note is played
        and also alter songs order and other things. They consist of a letter
        secifying the command, and an hexadecimal infobyte. (volume and
        instrument are decimal). There is one important (and complex) thing
        one should know about special codes. That is WHEN they are processed.
        It matters only with codes altering pitch, volume or other things
        which will be changed softly. For every row, these commands will
        be run by TEMPO/10-1 times. For example if tempo is 60, the volume
        slide will be run 5 times, which means that command D02 slides
        the volume down 5*2=10 units every row.

6.4.2   List of special commands

        A - Tempo. This command sets the tempo for the song. The tempo
            can be changed anytime, and effects all four channels. The
            default tempo is 60.
        B - Jump. This command breaks the current pattern, and jumps
            to order row specified by the infobyte. It can be used
            to create a beginning for a song, which is not repeated
            when the song ends. i.e. it can be jumped over.
        C - Break. This command breaks the current pattern, and
            plays the next one in orderlist.
        D - Slide volume. This command slides volume up/down.
            If the hi nibble (the left hex digit) is specified, the
            volume is increased by the amout the digit specifies.
            If the lo nibble is set, the volume will be decreased.
        E - Portamento up. This command slides the notes pitch
            up by a specified amount.
        F - Portamento down.
        G - Note Portamento. This command slides to a note. It's
            most easily clarified by an example:
            C-2 01 .. .00   On this line, instrument 1 starts playing
            ..  .. .. .00    note C2.
            E-2 .. .. G05   On this line, note E2 is NOT played, but
            ... .. .. G05    the pitch is slided by amount of 5 towards
            ... .. .. G1F    the E2 note. Remark that the amount must again
            be multiplied with the TEMPO/10-1 told about in the previous
            chapter. When the pitch reaches the note specified when it was
            started, the command has no effect.
        H - Vibrato. This command vibrates the sample, at a speed specified
            by the hi-nibble (bigger is faster). The lo-nibble specifies
            the vibrato size. (bigger is more vibrating).
        I - Tremor. This command rapidly turns the sound on/off.
            the hi-nibble specifies the time the sample is to be on
            (subrows, speified by the TEMPO/10-1) and the lo-nibble
            the time it should be off. The sound is tremored as long as
            the tremor commands are set.
        J - Arpeggio. Play chords. Alters the notes pitch fast. Three
	    stages: Note, Note+lo nibble halfnotes, Note+hi nibble halfnotes
	    (NOTE: Arpeggio hasn't been tested with Amiga musics using it
	    (note found) so it probably differs with amiga.
	K - Volume portamento. Not yet operative.
	L - Volume vibrato. Not yet operative.
	    

7       Sample list

7.1     What is it?

        The sample list, as it's name suggests, lists all samples used
        in the song. It also contains different parameters for all
        samples (parameters have been described earlier in this document).
        When instruments are added or deleted from the list, the samples
        should be reloaded by pressing F7. The fields are same as in
        Edit Library, with two exceptions. First the description field is
        not availible, and second, there are two 'Test' fields. You
        can also edit the song name from sample list by pressing ALT-E.

7.2     Test fields and beat testing.

        There are two test field after each sample name. By pressing
        the pianokeyboard keys while in this filed, the sample will
        be played. The 'Test1' field test the sample in one channel,
        thus each keypress starting a new note stops the previous
        note. The 'Test4' field enables you to play multiple notes
        so that they all play together. This is accomplished by
        playing the instument in each of the four availible channels,
        so if first note goes to channel 2, the next one goes to channel 3
        and so on. When all channels are used (4 notes played simultaneusly)
        the next note goes to the first channel and removes the oldest
        of the 4 notes from playing.
          There is also an Beat Test (ALT-B) option. In this mode you
        can easily play multiple instruments and test rythms etc. When
        in this mode, a text will be displayed and numbers '1'..'9'
        play samples 1..9 and keys 'A'..'V' samples 10..31. The samples
        are played at C2. To alter height in beat testing, change the
        C2SPD field from sample list.

7.3     List of commands

        <.......Substract 10h from tempo
        >.......Add 10h to tempo
        /.......Substract 1 from tempo
        *.......Add 1 to tempo
        ALT-E...Edit song name (on upper screen)
        ALT-S...Save samples to disk(s). Every sample will be saved to
                the disk named in 'Ds' field. Disk 00 means to cache
                directory (INS).
        ALT-O...Save one sample. The sample the cursor is on.
        ALT-L...Load one sample from disk. As F7, but for the one cursor is on.
        ALT-B...Beat testing
        ALT-C...Copy all instrument to library clipboard.
        ALT-M...Move instrument to different disk
        ALT-T...Same as ALT-C + moves all instruments to disk 99.
        ENTER...Pick instrument from library.
	SPACE...When pressed on the filename field, pops up a filepad which
		displays instruments in cache, and from where you can quickly 
		select an instrument on the harddisk.


8       Loading, saving and playing songs

8.1     Loading a song/module

        To load a song/module, select Load form main menu, or press
        either CTRL-R (for module), CTRL-L (for song) or CTRL-A
        (for amiga module). The use the file selection pad to
        select the correct file.

8.2     Saving song/module

        Saving is similar to loading, with one exception. Amiga modules
        can not be saved. They must be saved as ST modules.

8.3     Playing songs

        There are many ways to play a song. The simpliest one is
        pressing F5, which starts song in memory and displays infopage.
        If song is already being played, the infopage is only redisplayed.
        To restart song, press SHIFT-F5. There are also two playmodes
        useful when composing a song. First one is play pattern (F6).
        It will play the current pattern (the one the cursor is in in the
        Edit Patterns window) over and over again, until stopped with F8,
        which will always stop whatever is being played. The another
        playmode is Play from order (SHIFT-F6) which starts playing from
        order row the cursor is in in the Edit Order screen.

8.4     Infopage and status line info

        The infopage is displayed when the song is being played.
        Infopage can be exited with ESC and recalled with F5. It shows
        current instrument for each channel and a sort of volume meter
        for each channel. The meter is not realistic, but paractically
        works and shows when notes are struck, and at which volume.
          The statusline will also give information about the music
        while it's being played. From there you can see the current
        order row, pattern, row and loops, which tells how many times the
        song has been played (It doesn't always work, if jump to order
        command is used.) The statusline also displays the percentage telling
        how much of the song is played. All information is not displayed
        when palying patterns.

8.5     Scope

        There is also alternate 'infopage'. It is a scope display, and
        you can view it with CTRL-Z (or from menu). It displays the actual
        (and realistic) curve displaying the data values ouputted to the
        speaker. It is in fact songs 'waveform' in a way. Mainly the use
        from scope is purely entertaining. The scoop display requires CGA
        or compatible graphics display.
	
8.6	Tracking and Recording
	
	There are two quite similar playing modes which can also be used 
	for easy song entering and sort of song debugging. The Trace Song
	function starts from the beginning unless the song is already being
	played. In this case it acts like Scope, and continues from the
	current song position. It shows the patterns as they are played.
	The cyan bar in the middle of the screen shows the current position
	in song. The screen is updated while the song is being played.
	  The record option is otherwise similar to Tracking but you can
	select the current channel with arrows, and all notes you play,
	will be put to the current song position, on the channel you are
	on. Thus you can play a song from keyboard directly to memory.
	  The tracking is not yet very exact, so you'll probably have to
	modify the pauses between notes afterwards. It's also suggested
	that you use faster tempo than normally. For example with tempo
	30 the recording works quite well.

8.7     Loading amiga modules

        The load amiga module command (CTRL-A) prompts for filenames as normal
        load. It converts amiga modules from MasterSoundTracker, SoundTracker
        (..V2.4) and NoiseTracker (..V2.0). It requires modules to be unpacked.
        After the conversion is started, you can see the number of patterns
        converted in the right hand corner of the screen. On the screens
        right side will also be dislayed all commands used in the song.
        The left side will view the amigas 20 char filenames, which sometimes
        contain a message rather than instrument names. The amiga names
        will be truncated in the conversion. In the middle of the
        screen possible errors are shown. Errors mean that something in
        the module is not recognized by the converter, and doesn't
        always mean the song won't work. Most often the song works fine,
        but sometimes little differently than in amiga. It's also
        possible that the conversion totally failes resulting in something
        no one can call a song. If you plan to use the instruments
        in the amiga module, check that the filenames are legal for
        MS-DOS, before saving them. (The converter removes most illegal
        names). Especially remember to fill 'empty' names. Normally
        you can recognize whether or not a sample in sample list is
        empty by looking at the volume. Amiga files normally have volume
        0 in samples not used.


===============================================================================


	This document, the help file and the Scream Tracker are constantly
	being enhanced, so it's possible they differ a bit from each other.
	The help files quickhelps should always be accurate. Some recently
	added commands might only be found on quickhelps! But as always:
	try everything, and something may work out! 
	

